# Get Involved!
We are always looking for new users and contributors to help us make BioCypher
better. We are particulary interested in increasing the accessibility of
knowledge representation to structurally disadvantaged researchers. The best
way to get in contact for help, general questions, or to contribute is to join
our [Zulip channel](https://biocypher.zulipchat.com/) (free of charge). It also
doubles as our "mailing list"; in the `#announcements` channel, you can stay
informed about seminars, workshops, and other events. In the `#help` channel,
you can ask questions and get help. In the `#general` channel, you can introduce
yourselves, discuss ideas, and share your work.

We chose Zulip because it is a modern, open-source alternative to Slack. It
is organised by topics, which helps in keeping the discussions focused. It also
is free of charge for open-source and academic projects, which means that they
sponsor the cloud hosting for our channel (as for many other open-source
projects) - thanks!

If you want to contribute, please have a look at our [contribution
guidelines](https://github.com/saezlab/BioCypher/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md),
including our [code of
conduct](https://github.com/saezlab/BioCypher/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and
[developer guide](https://github.com/saezlab/BioCypher/blob/main/DEVELOPER.md).
For simple communication, join the `#development` channel on Zulip, where you
can ask questions and discuss ideas. You can also open an issue on
[GitHub](https://github.com/saezlab/BioCypher/issues) for feature requests
including adapters. If you want to find out whether you favourite resource or
database is already supported, planned, or in progress, have a look at our
[Github project](https://github.com/orgs/saezlab/projects/5/views/6).
